Add release notes for 0.217 (#12345)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.217.rst

=============
Release 0.217
=============

General Changes
---------------

> * Fix poor query planning performance for queries that are submitted when the cluster does not have the minimum required number of workers available.

Author: @nezihyigitbasi made the suggestion of changing `slow` to `poor query`. I think that make sense since "slow" does not go with performance, only good or bad?

* Fix an issue causing a union of a table with a ``VALUES`` statement to execute on a single machine, which may result in out of memory errors.

> * Improve the logical plan by removing unnecessary remote exchanges before window functions when the data is already available locally.

Author: @shixuan-fan

> * Improve the logical plan by removing unnecessary remote exchanges before window functions when the data is already available locally.

Reviewer: Improve the logical plan by removing unnecessary remote exchanges before window functions when the data is already available locally. This unifies remote exchange elimination strategy between window function and aggregation and reduces cpu usage.

> * Improve the logical plan by removing unnecessary remote exchanges before window functions when the data is already available locally.

Author: I'm not sure how user will understand "remote exchange elimination strategy", so I'll rephrase the original ones and add indication that this helps reduce cpu usage.
```
Improve CPU usage by removing unnecessary remote exchanges from the logical plan before window functions if the data is already available locally.
```

> * Improve the logical plan by removing unnecessary remote exchanges before window functions when the data is already available locally.

Reviewer 2: Improve performance of some queries containing window functions by eliminating redundant shuffles.

* Add grouped execution support for window functions.

> * Add support for the ``BOOLEAN`` type for ``EXPLAIN IO`` statements.

Reviewer 2: This seemed like maybe it was just a bug before?

Reviewer: No it was not. We deliberately limited the supported types (see discussions here: https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/11049#discussion_r206356547)

> * Add support for choosing distribution type for semi joins based on the cost model when ``join_distribution_type='AUTOMATIC'``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for choosing distribution type for semi joins based on estimated cost when the session property ``join_distribution_type='AUTOMATIC'`` or the configuration property <INSERT HERE> is set. @rschlussel 
```

> * Add support for collecting table statistics on demand with the ``ANALYZE`` statement.

Reviewer 2: What is the syntax to use this?

Author: It is `ANALYZE qualifiedName (WITH properties)?`, but I don't think we need to expose that level of detail.

Reviewer 3: Currently, it's only implemented in hive connector. The syntax is:
```
ANALYZE <qualifiedName>
ANALYZE <qualifiedName> WITH (partitions = <partition_list>)
    <partition_list> = ARRAY[<partition_column_values>]
    <partition_column_values> = ARRAY[VARCHAR] 

Example:
ANALYZE table1
ANALYZE table1 With (partitions = ARRAY[ARRAY['2018-02-20']])
```

* Add a config option (``query.stage-count-warning-threshold``) to specify a per-query threshold for the number of stages.

>   When this threshold is exceeded a ``TOO_MANY_STAGES`` warning is raised as part of the query information.

Reviewer 2: @elonazoulay What is `query information`?

Reviewer 4: I am not sure about the second part of the sentence:) Can it be changed to "When this threshold is exceeded a ``TOO_MANY_STAGES`` warning is raised" ?
Can I change it myself?

Reviewer 2: Yes, that phrasing works better.

> * Add per-task peak user memory usage to query statistics.

Reviewer 2: We don't generally talk about changes to internal JSON structures.

Reviewer 5: This is not really internal, the change adds a new field to `QueryStatistics`, which can be used by event listeners.

> * Add the number of bytes spilled to the presto-cli output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add CLI support for showing the amount of data spilled during query execution.
```

* Add :func:`ST_Points` function.
* Add :doc:`/connector/elasticsearch`.
* Remove the system memory pool and related configuration properties (``resources.reserved-system-memory``, ``deprecated.legacy-system-pool-enabled``) entirely.
  System memory pool was deprecated in 0.201, and it was unused by default since that release. All memory allocations will now be served from the general/user memory pool.

Web UI
------

* Improve live plan to show data transfer statistics as edge labels.
* Improve live plan to contain more information about each node. For example, table scan nodes now show the name of the tables that are being scanned.
* Improve stage skew histograms to make it easier to identify low skew.
* Add the ability to zoom when viewing plans for completed queries.

> * Add the number of bytes spilled to query details page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for showing the amount of data spilled during query execution.
```

Hive Connector Changes
----------------------

* Fix an issue that may cause a partially successful rollback to cause data loss and corrupt the metastore.
  The ``hive.skip-target-cleanup-on-rollback`` config option can be used to skip deleting target directories when partition creation is rolled back.

> * Fix an issue where creating a table on S3 could fail for empty S3 "directories"

Reviewer 2: I think I understand why you used quotes here, but I'm not sure anybody else well. I would lose the quotes or explain further.

Author: @raghavsethi I don't think I have the context. Since this was @kokosing 's commit, I went through his commit and added the release notes for him.

Reviewer 5: How about:

```
Fix an issue where creating a table on S3 could fail for S3 prefixes without any associated objects (e.g., empty S3 directories).
```

* Add support for ``ANALYZE`` statement in the Hive connector.
  It's possible to specify a list of partitions to collect statistics for using the ``WITH`` properties of the ``ANALYZE`` statement.
* Add configuration property ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-enabled`` and ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-path``
  to make the staging directory for write operations configurable.

JDBC Connector Changes
----------------------

> * Add support for getting table statistics from JDBC connectors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add support for gathering table statistics.
```

=============
Release 0.217
=============

General Changes
---------------

* Fix slow query planning performance for queries submitted when cluster did not have the required number of workers available.
* Fix an issue where a union of a table with a values statement would execute on a single node, which could lead to out of memory errors.

> * Fix partition properties derivation for full outer join.

Reviewer 6: This can be removed as the change has already been reverted from this release.

* Improve logical plan to remove extra remote exchange before window function when data is already available locally.

> * Add support for grouped execution for window function.

Reviewer: @nezihyigitbasi I think grouped execution should already be well known given the release note 0.199 when we introduced grouped execution for aggregation.

How about writing the release note like the following:

```
Expand grouped execution support to window function, making it possible to execute window function with less peak memory usage. It is controlled by session property ``grouped_execution_for_aggregation``.
```

> * Add support for grouped execution for window function.

Reviewer 7: `grouped execution` was first introduced in 0.191: http://prestodb.github.io/docs/current/release/release-0.191.html:

> Add support for grouped join execution. When both sides of a join have the same table partitioning and the partitioning is addressable, partial data can be loaded into memory at a time, making it possible to execute the join with less peak memory usage. The colocated join feature must be enabled with the colocated-joins-enabled config property or the colocated_join session property, and the concurrent_lifespans_per_task session property must be specified.

* Add support for boolean type in EXPLAIN IO.
* Add support for choosing distribution type for semi join based on cost when ``join_distribution_type='AUTOMATIC'``
* Add ST_Points function to access vertexes of a linestring.
* Add configuration property "query.stage-count-warning-threshold".
* Add ``TOO_MANY_STAGES`` warning when the number of stages exceeds this threshold.
* Add ``ANALYZE`` statement to the engine which allows collecting table statistics on demand.
* Add peak user memory usage per task to query stats.
* Add the amount of data spilled to CLI dialog.
* Add :doc:`/connector/elasticsearch`.
* Remove the system memory pool and related configuration properties (``resources.reserved-system-memory``, ``deprecated.legacy-system-pool-enabled``) entirely.
  System memory pool was deprecated in 0.201, and it was unused by default since that release. All memory allocations will now be served from the general/user memory pool.

Web UI
------

* Improve live plan to show data transfer statistics as edge labels.
* Improve live plan to contain more information about each node.
  For example, table scans now show the name of table being scanned.

> * Improve stage skew histograms to make it easier to identify low skew.

Reviewer 2: We can remove this, it's not important.

* Add the ability to zoom when viewing plan for completed queries.
* Add spilled data to query details page.

Hive Connector Changes
----------------------

> * Fix ``hive.skip-target-cleanup-on-rollback`` is set, don't delete the target directories when partition creation is rolled back.

Reviewer 8: I would edit the first sentence to say
```
Fix an issue where a partially successful rollback of a write could cause data loss and corrupt the metastore.
```

  This fixes an issue where a rollback that only partly succeed could lead to data loss and corrupt Metastore entries.

> * Fix an issue where create table on S3 would fail with an empty S3 prefix.

Reviewer 5: Fix an issue where creating a table on S3 could fail for empty S3 "directories"

(I put directories in double quotes as S3 doesn't really have directories, the other way to phrase this is to say "prefixes without associated objects").

* Add support for ``ANALYZE`` statement in the Hive connector. Users can specify a list of

>   partitions to analyze via WITH properties of the ANALYZE statement.

Reviewer 5: `analyze` is for stats collection, so `partitions to analyze` sound weird.

```
It's possible to specify a list of partitions to collect statistics for using the ``WITH`` properties of the ``ANALYZE`` statement.
```

> * Add configuration property ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-enabled`` and ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-path``

Reviewer 5: Add ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-enabled`` and ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-path`` config options to make the staging directory for write operations configurable.

=============
Release 0.217
=============

General Changes
---------------

* Fix poor query planning performance for queries submitted when the cluster does not have the minimum required number of workers available.
* Fix a bug that caused a union of a table with a ``VALUES`` statement to execute on a single machine, which may result in out of memory errors.

> * Improve CPU usage by removing unnecessary remote exchanges from the logical plan before window functions if the data is already available locally.

Reviewer: Improve worker CPU usage by removing unnecessary shuffle before evaluating window functions.

* Add grouped execution support for window functions.
* Add support for the ``BOOLEAN`` type for ``EXPLAIN IO`` statements.
* Add support for choosing distribution type for semi joins based on estimated cost when the session property ``join_distribution_type='AUTOMATIC'`` is set.
* Add support for collecting table statistics on demand with the ``ANALYZE`` statement.

> * Add a config option (``query.stage-count-warning-threshold``) to specify a per-query threshold for the number of stages.

Reviewer 5: We use both `config option` and `configuration property` in this doc, let's be consistent and always use `configuration property`.

>   When this threshold is exceeded, a ``TOO_MANY_STAGES`` warning is raised

Reviewer 5: Put a `.` at the end of this sentence.

  The ``hive.skip-target-cleanup-on-rollback`` config option can be used to skip deleting target directories when partition creation is rolled back.
* Fix an issue where creating a table on S3 could fail for S3 prefixes without any associated objects (e.g., empty S3 directories).
* Add support for ``ANALYZE`` statement in the Hive connector.
  It's possible to specify a list of partitions to collect statistics for using the ``WITH`` properties of the ``ANALYZE`` statement.
* Add configuration property ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-enabled`` and session property ``temporary_staging_directory_enabled``
  to control whether a temporary staging directory should be used for write operations.
* Add configuration property ``hive.temporary-staging-directory-path`` and session property ``temporary_staging_directory_path``
  to control the location of temporary staging directory that is used for write operations.
  The ${USER} placeholder can be used to use a different location for each user (e.g., /tmp/${USER}).

JDBC Connector Changes
----------------------

* Add support for defining procedures.
* Add support for providing table statistics.

SPI Changes
-----------

> * Add new SPIs for ``ANALYZE`` statement. By default, running the ``ANALYZE`` statement for a connector that does not implement these SPIs throws

Reviewer 5: `Add new SPIs for the`

>   ``USER_ERROR`` with error code ``NOT_SUPPORTED``.

Reviewer 5: `throws` sounds weird to me here, how about?

```
results in an error of type ``USER_ERROR`` with error code ``NOT_SUPPORTED``.
```

Author: I think we can just say `results in `USER_ERROR``
